feat: additional rule metadata for deprecations (#124)
eslint/rfcs: designs/2024-deprecated-rule-metadata/README.md

## Detailed Design

<!--
   This is the bulk of the RFC.

   Explain the design with enough detail that someone familiar with ESLint
   can implement it by reading this document. Please get into specifics
   of your approach, corner cases, and examples of how the change will be
   used. Be sure to define any new terms in this section.
-->

We propose to extend `meta.deprecated` rule property schemas to reduce ambiguity and allow additional key details to be represented.
Plugin developers are free to add additional properties (e.g. a link to the original GitHub PR).

```ts
type RuleMeta = {
  deprecated?:
    | boolean // Existing boolean option, backwards compatible.
    | DeprecatedInfo // Proposed extension

  /** @deprecated */
  replacedBy?: string[] // Deprecate the top-level property and "move" into the "deprecated" object
};

/* At least one property is required */
type DeprecatedInfo = {
  message?: string // General message presented to the user, e.g. for the key rule why the rule is deprecated or for info how to replace the rule
  url?: string     // URL to more information about this deprecation in general

>   replacedBy?: (string|ReplacedByInfo)[] // An empty array explicitly states that there is no replacement

Reviewer: Do we need `string|` here?

Author: No, this was part of the "shorthands" which I seem to have missed.

  rule?: Specifier
}

type Specifier = {
  name?: string // Name of the plugin / rule / ...
  url?: string  // URL to documentation for the plugin / rule
}

/* Version string of the package containing the rule (without a leading v and using the full semver, e.g. 8.53.0) */
type Version = string
```

The `meta.replacedBy` property is moved into the `meta.deprecated` property as `meta.replacedBy` requires `meta.deprecated` to be set.
The reason for this is that a rule logically must be marked as deprecated to be replaced by another rule which it currently can be.

### Example
Real-world example of how this could be used based on the situation in <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/18053>:

```js
// lib/rules/semi.js
module.exports = {
  meta: {
    deprecated: {
      message: 'Stylistic rules are being moved out of ESLint core.',
      url: 'https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules/',
      replacedBy: [
        {
          plugin: {
          name: '@stylistic/js',
          url: 'https://eslint.style/rules/js/semi',

>         },

Reviewer: This should be a URL to the plugin docs, and there should be an additional `rule` key with rule name and link to the rule docs?

> Stylistic rules are being moved out of ESLint core. [Read more](https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules/).

We can also support the same `meta.deprecated` and `meta.replacedBy` properties on configurations and processors (the other kinds of objects exported by ESLint plugins), replacing `rule` with `config` or `processor` as needed. This would be part of the effort to standardize documentation properties in <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/17842>.

### Changes
In terms of actual changes inside ESLint needed for this:

- Mention the new schema in the [custom rule documentation](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/extend/custom-rules#rule-structure)
- Ensure these properties are allowed on all extension points (configurations, formatter, parsers and processors)
- Add any additional information to these properties in core rules as desired (such as in <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/18053>)
- Update ESLint's website generator to take into account the additional information for rule doc deprecation notices

> - Update [LintResult.usedDeprecatedRules](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/0f5df509a4bc00cff2c62b90fab184bdf0231322/lib/eslint/eslint.js#L197-L211) by normalizing the old and new format for the existing `replacedBy` property and adding a new property with the name `info` for rules using the new deprecated format
> 
> External changes:
> 
> - Update the [types](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/35a8858d62cb050fa0b56702e55c94ffaaf6956d/lib/types/index.d.ts#L745) in eslint

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Update [LintResult.usedDeprecatedRules](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/0f5df509a4bc00cff2c62b90fab184bdf0231322/lib/eslint/eslint.js#L197-L211) by normalizing the old and new format for the existing `replacedBy` property and adding a new property with the name `info` for rules using the new deprecated format
- Update the [types](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/35a8858d62cb050fa0b56702e55c94ffaaf6956d/lib/types/index.d.ts#L745) in eslint

External changes:

```

Since this in an internal change.

  url?: string     // URL to more information about this replacement in general
  plugin?: Specifier // name should be "eslint" if the replacemenet is an ESLint core rule. Omit the property if the replacement is in the same plugin
  rule?: Specifier
}

type Specifier = {
  name?: string // Name of the plugin / rule / ...
  url?: string  // URL to documentation for the plugin / rule
}

/* Version string of the package containing the rule (without a leading v and using the full semver, e.g. 8.53.0) */
type Version = string
```

The `meta.replacedBy` property is moved into the `meta.deprecated` property as `meta.replacedBy` requires `meta.deprecated` to be set.
The reason for this is that a rule logically must be marked as deprecated to be replaced by another rule which it currently can be.

### Example
Real-world example of how this could be used based on the situation in <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/18053>:

```js
// lib/rules/semi.js
module.exports = {
  meta: {
    deprecated: {
      message: 'Stylistic rules are being moved out of ESLint core.',
      url: 'https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules/',
      replacedBy: [

>         {
>           plugin: {
>           name: '@stylistic/js',
>           url: 'https://eslint.style/',
>           rule: {
>             name: 'semi',
>             url: 'https://eslint.style/rules/js/semi'
>           }
>         },

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        {
          plugin: {
            name: "@stylistic/eslint-plugin-js",
            url: "https://eslint.style/",
          },
          rule: {
            name: "semi",
            url: "https://eslint.style/rules/js/semi",
          },
        },
```

Per the types, `rule` is not inside `plugin`.

## Frequently Asked Questions

- Why not provide a property to describe how to migrate to the replacement rule which requires an option to be set?
  - The options of the replacement rule could change and it is unlikely that a deprecated rules gets updated to accommodate the change

<!--
    This section is optional but suggested.

    Try to anticipate points of clarification that might be needed by
    the people reviewing this RFC. Include those questions and answers
    in this section.
-->

## Related Discussions

<!--
    This section is optional but suggested.

    If there is an issue, pull request, or other URL that provides useful
    context for this proposal, please include those links here.
-->

- [The original RFC](https://github.com/eslint/rfcs/pull/116)
- [The issue triggering this RFC](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/18061)
- Inspirations
  - <https://github.com/jsx-eslint/eslint-plugin-react/pull/3469#discussion_r1002316631>
  - <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/5774#issuecomment-220640368>
- Related
  - <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/17842>

>   - <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/18694>

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

I think this isn't related. Frozen rules are not deprecated.

Author: I added this reference for `availableUntil: null` which should signify that a rule is frozen.

Reviewer: The linked issue is only about marking some non-deprecated rules as frozen, so I still think it isn't related to the subject of this RFC.

frozen = we're not accepting new features (e.g., new options), but the rule is actively maintained (bug fixes & support for new syntax).

deprecated = we're not making any changes, and we don't guarantee that the rule won't be removed in a future major version:

https://eslint.org/docs/latest/use/rule-deprecation

    | DeprecatedInfo // Proposed extension

  /** @deprecated */
  replacedBy?: string[] // Deprecate the top-level property and "move" into the "deprecated" object
};

/* At least one property is required */
type DeprecateInfo = {
  info?: Message
  replacedBy?: (string|ReplacedByInfo)[] // An empty array explicitly states that there is no replacement
  deprecatedSince?: Version // Helps users gauge when to migrate and useful for documentation
  availableUntil?: Version | null // The estimated version when the rule is removed (probably the next major version). null means the rule is "frozen" (will be available but will not be changed)
}

/* At least one property is required */
type ReplacedByInfo = {
  plugin?: Specifier // name should be "eslint" if the replacemenet is an ESLint core rule. Omit the property if the replacement is in the same plugin
  rule?: Specifier
  info?: Message
  kind?: ReplacementKind // Defaults to "moved" if missing
}

type Message = {
  message?: string // General message presented to the user. Content depends on the property (e.g. for the key rule why the rule is deprecated or for info how to replace the rule)

>   url?:            // URL to more information about this deprecation in general.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  url?: string           // URL to more information about this deprecation in general.
```

}

type Specifier = {

>   name?: string // Name of the rule / configuration / ...
>   url?: string // URL to more information about this deprecation in general.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  name?: string // Name of the plugin / rule / ...
  url?: string  // URL to documentation for the plugin / rule / ...
```

}

type ReplacementKind =
  'moved' |  // The rule has moved to another plugin if plugin is set, otherwise the rule is renamed in the same plugin
  'merged' | // The rule merged with another rule
  'option'   // The current rule behavior is available as an option in the replacement rule

> /* Version string of the package containing the rule */

Reviewer: ```suggestion
/* Version string. It should be the full semver version without the "v" prefix, e.g. "8.53.0" */
```

Per the discussion on https://github.com/eslint/rfcs/pull/124#discussion_r1773117929

type Version = string
```

The `meta.replacedBy` property is moved into the `meta.deprecated` property as `meta.replacedBy` requires `meta.deprecated` to be set.
The reason for this is that a rule logically must be marked as deprecated to be replaced by another rule which it currently can be.

### Example
Real-world example of how this could be used based on the situation in <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/18053>:

```js
// lib/rules/semi.js
module.exports = {
  meta: {
    deprecated: {
      message: 'Stylistic rules are being moved out of ESLint core.',
      url: 'https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules/',
      replacedBy: [
        {
          plugin: {

>           name: '@stylistic/js',
>           url: 'https://eslint.style/',
>         },
>         rule: 'https://eslint.style/rules/js/semi',

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
            name: '@stylistic/js',
            url: 'https://eslint.style/',
          },
          rule: 'https://eslint.style/rules/js/semi',
```

To fix the indentation.

        },
      ],
    },
  },
};
```

This data could be used by documentation websites and tooling like [eslint-doc-generator](https://github.com/bmish/eslint-doc-generator) to generate notices and links like:

> semi (deprecated) \
> Replaced by [semi](https://eslint.style/rules/js/semi) from [@stylistic/js](https://eslint.style/). \
> Use the `foo` option on the new rule to achieve the same behavior as before. [Read more](https://example.com/how-to-migrate-to-the-new-semi-rule). \
> Stylistic rules are being moved out of ESLint core. [Read more](https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules/).

We can also support the same `meta.deprecated` and `meta.replacedBy` properties on configurations and processors (the other kinds of objects exported by ESLint plugins), replacing `rule` with `config` or `processor` as needed. This would be part of the effort to standardize documentation properties in <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/17842>.

### Changes
In terms of actual changes inside ESLint needed for this:

- Mention the new schema in the [custom rule documentation](https://eslint.org/docs/latest/extend/custom-rules#rule-structure)

> - Ensure these properties are allowed on configurations, parsers and processors

Reviewer: If this RFC only aims to add support for additional metadata for rule deprecations, then I think this change is out of its scope.

Author: I focused on the rule case as the original proposal did.
As mentioned in FAQ question 3, I think that the remaining extension points (e.g. configs) also should have a deprecated property.
In the case of configs, ESLint could print an error informing the user of the deprecated shared config and what the user should do.
I would add additional sections for them and extend the current ones (e.g. internal changes) if other extension points should be part of the proposal.

Reviewer: @eslint/eslint-tsc do we want this RFC to cover configurations, parsers, and processors as well, or only rules?

Reviewer: Then, I think we should remove this line from the RFC as it's out of scope and it isn't clear what the action item would be.

- Add any additional information to these properties in core rules as desired (such as in <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/18053>)
- Update ESLint's website generator to take into account the additional information for rule doc deprecation notices

> - Update [LintResult.usedDeprecatedRules](https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/0f5df509a4bc00cff2c62b90fab184bdf0231322/lib/eslint/eslint.js#L197-L211)

Reviewer: Can you add more details about this change? Shall we keep the existing `replacedBy: string[]` property and/or add a new one with the `DeprecatedInfo` object?

Reviewer 2: I think that removing or changing the format of `DeprecatedRuleInfo.replacedBy` could break existing tools like custom formatters. Maybe it would be better to expose the `RuleMeta.deprecated` object as a new property of `DeprecatedRuleInfo`?

Author: I think we should normalize the old and new format for `replacedBy` and provide the new data if available under a new property named `info` as this backwards-compatible.

Reviewer: > I think we should normalize the old and new format for `replacedBy` and provide the new data if available under a new property named `info` as this backwards-compatible.

Sounds good to me.

External changes:

> - Update the [types](https://github.com/DefinitelyTyped/DefinitelyTyped/blob/b77d83e019025017b06953907cb77f35e4231714/types/eslint/index.d.ts#L734) in @types/eslint

Reviewer: This would be a change inside ESLint, because the `eslint` package now includes types: 

https://github.com/eslint/eslint/blob/7dd402d33226d821a17b22c4753ce9c40fc909bd/lib/types/index.d.ts#L744-L747

Overall, a limited number of third-party tools that might be affected, and these should be trivial to fix when impacts are discovered.

We do not need to consider this to be a breaking change in terms of [ESLint's semantic versioning policy](https://github.com/eslint/eslint#semantic-versioning-policy).

## Alternatives

<!--
    What other designs did you consider? Why did you decide against those?

    This section should also include prior art, such as whether similar
    projects have already implemented a similar feature.
-->

### Do nothing

This would leave the current `meta.deprecated` and `meta.replacedBy` properties as they are, which would continue to be ambiguous and limited in the information they can provide.

### Create a new property

Create a new property, e.g. `meta.deprecation`,

## Open Questions

<!--
    This section is optional, but is suggested for a first draft.

    What parts of this proposal are you unclear about? What do you
    need to know before you can finalize this RFC?

    List the questions that you'd like reviewers to focus on. When
    you've received the answers and updated the design to reflect them,
    you can remove this section.
-->

> 1. Is there additional deprecation information we'd like to represent? Note that additional information can always be added later, but it's good to consider any possible needs now.

Reviewer 2: > Is there additional deprecation information we'd like to represent?

Not for ESLint directly as far as I know, but third-party plugins may want to include additional deprecation information for their specific purposes. One use case that's been already mentioned in https://github.com/eslint/rfcs/pull/124/files#r1764772326 is the ability to mark a rule that was renamed. Another use case is to include the commit hash or PR link in which a rule was deprecated, like shown in the `typescript-eslint` docs ([an example](https://typescript-eslint.io/rules/block-spacing/)).

My suggestion is that we only focus on information consumed by ESLint in this RFC (hence no `ReplacementKind` needed). But I'd also suggest that we don't try to validate or forbid unrecognized properties in a `meta.deprecated` object.

## Detailed Design

<!--
   This is the bulk of the RFC.

   Explain the design with enough detail that someone familiar with ESLint
   can implement it by reading this document. Please get into specifics
   of your approach, corner cases, and examples of how the change will be
   used. Be sure to define any new terms in this section.
-->

We propose to extend `meta.deprecated` rule property schemas to reduce ambiguity and allow additional key details to be represented, described below using TypeScript types for clarity:

```ts
type RuleMeta = {
  deprecated?:
    | boolean // Existing boolean option, backwards compatible.
    | string // Shorthand property for general deprecation message, such as why the deprecation occurred. Empty strings are forbidden as they are falsy.
    | DeprecatedInfo // Proposed extension

  /** @deprecated */
  replacedBy?: string[] // Deprecate the top-level property and "move" into the "deprecated" object
};

/* At least one property is required */

> type DeprecateInfo = {

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
type DeprecatedInfo = {
```

  info?: Message
  replacedBy?: (string|ReplacedByInfo)[] // An empty array explicitly states that there is no replacement
  deprecatedSince?: Version // Helps users gauge when to migrate and useful for documentation

>   availableUntil?: Version | null // The estimated version when the rule is removed (probably the next major version). null means the rule is "frozen" (will be available but will not be changed)

Reviewer 3: > Also, let's suppose that we decide to deprecate a rule in ESLint v10. What value should be set for `deprecatedSince`? Should it be `"v10.0.0-alpha.0"`,`"v10.0.0"`, `"v10"`, etc.?

`10.0.0`. Prereleases don't count and we should use the full semver version.

/* At least one property is required */
type ReplacedByInfo = {
  plugin?: string | Specifier // name should be "eslint" if the replacemenet is an ESLint core rule. Omit the property if the replacement is in the same plugin
  rule?: string | Specifier
  info?: string | Message
  kind?: ReplacementKind // Defaults to "moved" if missing
  deprecatedSince?: Version // Helps users gauge when to migrate and useful for documentation

>   availableUntil?: Version | null // The estimated version when the rule is removed (probably the next major version). null means the rule is "frozen" (will be available but will not be changed)

Reviewer: Shouldn't these two properties rather be on `DeprecateInfo`, as they don't seem related to particular replacements but the deprecation itself?

Author: Yes, they should be.

}

> type Message = {

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure this type is necessary. I'd rather just move `message` and `url` to `DeprecatedInfo` and `ReplacedByInfo`. Remove one level of objects.

Reviewer: I also think it would be better to simplify this by moving these properties directly into `DeprecatedInfo` and `ReplacedByInfo`.

  message: string // General message presented to the user. Content depends on the property (e.g. for the key rule why the rule is deprecated or for info how to replace the rule)
  url:            // URL to more information about this deprecation in general.
}

type Specifier = {
  name: string // Name of the rule / configuration / ...
  url: string // URL to more information about this deprecation in general.
}

type ReplacementKind =
  'moved' |  // The rule has moved to another plugin if plugin is set, otherwise the rule is renamed in the same plugin
  'merged' | // The rule merged with another rule

>   'option'   // The current rule behavior is available as an option in the replacement rule

Reviewer: I think `ReplacedByInfo.kind` isn't necessary as this info and more context can be provided as part of the `ReplacedByInfo.info` (or ReplacedByInfo.info.message) text.

Author: The idea behind this property was:
- for documentation generators: able to provide a default "message" without having to specify the same message for multiple rules (e.g. the rule was renamed from "foo" to "bar")
- a possible config migration tool: suggest changes without relying on a specific format in info.message (e.g. rename the rule in the config)

Reviewer 3: I'm also not sure of the value here. A single word just doesn't given enough context. I also fear this would become a maintenance issue as we'll end finding other reasons rules were deprecated and need to update this list with more unclear terms.

Reviewer: Looks like we're in favor of removing this property. @DMartens can you update the RFC?

/* Version string of the package containing the rule */
type Version = string
```

The `meta.replacedBy` property is moved into the `meta.deprecated` property as `meta.replacedBy` requires `meta.deprecated` to be set.
The reason for this is that a rule logically must be marked as deprecated to be replaced by another rule which it currently can be.

### Example
Real-world example of how this could be used based on the situation in <https://github.com/eslint/eslint/issues/18053>:

```js
// lib/rules/semi.js
module.exports = {
  meta: {
    deprecated: {
      message: 'Stylistic rules are being moved out of ESLint core.',

>       url: 'https://eslint.org/blog/2023/10/deprecating-formatting-rules/',

Reviewer 3: `message` and `url` aren't listed as members above (although, I do like this better. See my earlier comments.)

      replacedBy: [
        {
          plugin: {
          name: '@stylistic/js',
          url: 'https://eslint.style/',
        },
        rule: 'https://eslint.style/rules/js/semi',

>         },

Reviewer 3: Syntax error

### Shorthand
The shorthand for the properties `plugin`, `rule` and `info` is just a string representing either the `name`/`message` or the `url` based on its content.
If it starts with a protocol (e.g. `https://`) the property should be interpreted as if only the `url` property is set, otherwise it should be interpreted as `name`/`message` property.
This shorthand also applies for the existing `meta.deprecated` which then applies for the `meta.deprecated.info` properties.
Some examples:
```js
{ meta: { deprecated: { plugin: 'https://eslint.style' } } }   // <=> { meta: { deprecated: { plugin: { url: 'https://eslint.style' } } } }
{ meta: { deprecated: { plugin: '@eslint-stylistic/js' } } }   // <=> { meta: { deprecated: { plugin: { name: '@eslint-stylistic/js' } } } }
{ meta: { deprecated: 'https://eslint.style/guide/migration' } // <=> { meta: { deprecated: { info: { url: 'https://eslint.style/guide/migration' } } } }

> ```

Reviewer: In my opinion, this is an unnecessary complexity that tooling would need to support. I'd be in favor of dropping shorthands to simplify this. Deprecations don't happen often, and it doesn't take much effort to write an object with a `name` or `url` property instead of a string.

Reviewer 3: Agree with @mdjermanovic on this.

Reviewer: `deprecated: {}` can be interpreted the same as `deprecated: true`. Other properties can be interpreted as if they were not provided.

Reviewer: Looks like we all agree to drop the shorthands. @DMartens can you update the RFC?

Author: Dropped the shorthands and made the object properties optional.

## Alternatives

<!--
    What other designs did you consider? Why did you decide against those?

    This section should also include prior art, such as whether similar
    projects have already implemented a similar feature.
-->

### Do nothing

This would leave the current `meta.deprecated` and `meta.replacedBy` properties as they are, which would continue to be ambiguous and limited in the information they can provide.

### Create a new property

Create a new property, e.g. `meta.deprecation`,

## Open Questions

<!--
    This section is optional, but is suggested for a first draft.

    What parts of this proposal are you unclear about? What do you
    need to know before you can finalize this RFC?

    List the questions that you'd like reviewers to focus on. When
    you've received the answers and updated the design to reflect them,
    you can remove this section.
-->

1. Is there additional deprecation information we'd like to represent? Note that additional information can always be added later, but it's good to consider any possible needs now.

> 2. Should `meta.deprecated.plugin.id` accommodate different package registries (e.g. [jsr](https://jsr.io/) with `jsr:eslint-plugin-example`)

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
2. Should `meta.deprecated.plugin.name` accommodate different package registries (e.g. [jsr](https://jsr.io/) with `jsr:eslint-plugin-example`)
```

Reviewer 3: In general, I don't think we should worry about package registries. People should include a URL to the package wherever its published if this is a concern.

3. Should the exact regular expression for the shorthand which decides whether it is a description or URL be specified?

> 4. Should the shorthand also be applied for the string form of the `meta.deprecated` property?

Reviewer: I'd prefer dropping shorthands, so we wouldn't have these questions.

5. Which "extension points" (rules, processors, configurations, parsers, formatters) shold be supported?

> 6. Should the `rule` key be dependent on the "extension point" (e.g. `processor` for processors) or renamed (e.g. ``) so that it is the same property name for all?

Author: I do not know of examples for other extension points being deprecated but especially with the introduction of language plugins, I can see some processors being deprecated (e.g. eslint-plugin-markdown).
